Initial pass at documenting SGX-LKL threading. (#807)
lsds/sgx-lkl: docs/Threading.md

> The SGX-LKL threading implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The SGX-LKL threading implementation
```

Author: I don't think we need two kinds of markup to say that this is h1.

====================================

SGX-LKL has four kinds of threads: ethreads, lthreads, Linux tasks, and pthreads.
This document explains how they are implemented and how they relate.

> Ethreads are the lowest-level threads are ethreads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethreads are the lowest-level threads.
```

These are roughly analogous to VCPUs in conventional VMs.

> In SGX, each ethread corresponds to a thread-control structure (TCS), allocated by OpenEnclave.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In SGX, each ethread corresponds to a thread-control structure (TCS), allocated by [Open Enclave](https://openenclave.io/sdk/).
```

> The lthreads layer provides a cooperative threading library on top of ethreads.

Reviewer 2: lthreads are some library https://lthread.readthedocs.io/en/latest/intro.html ? The name confuses me, l is not for linux i guess.

Author: It's based on that library, but heavily modified.

Reviewer 2: Mentioning that will help people understand that l is not for linux and that they are on their own anyway. I guess ethreads are enclave threads too, implied but not stated. It may be me being thick or that it is such a long time since I did guts level linux stuff.

Author: ```suggestion
The lthreads (lightweight threads) layer provides a cooperative threading library on top of ethreads.
```

Each ethread runs an instance of the lthread scheduler, which pulls lthreads from a multi-producer, multi-consumer queue (MPMCQ) to run.
These threads run until they explicitly yield.

> The Linux kernel (LKL) manages its own task abstraction.

Reviewer 2: The Linux kernel (LKL) manages its own task abstraction, **in the usual linux way** perhaps? Or is it special to LKL and different to linux?

Author: Saying Linux does things in the usual Linux way feels tautological.

Author: See change below.

Each Linux task is associated with an lthread.
The LKL documentation refers to 'host threads', these are lthreads in our use.

The userspace libc (musl) provides a POSIX threads (pthreads) implementation that sits atop Linux's tasks.
Each pthread is run by the lthread scheduler but may be caused to block by LKL.

> 

Reviewer: considering that you refer to "lowest level" in the beginning a diagram of "levels" and where each of the 4 types exist would be very helpful.

> Ethreads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Ethreads
```

Author: I prefer the underline syntax for h1 and h2 in Markdown.

Author: Looking at the doc, all of the headers are off by one in their level - both the main title and the section headings are h1.

> ========

Author: ```suggestion
--------
```

> Ethreads are created by the host environment calling one of two ecalls, either [`sgxlkl_enclave_init`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/24467b08346cd7384eb93f845dec896a1d429711/src/enclave/enclave_oe.c#L395) (for the first ethread) or [`sgxlkl_ethread_init`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/24467b08346cd7384eb93f845dec896a1d429711/src/enclave/enclave_oe.c) (for subsequent ethreads).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ethreads are created by the host environment calling one of two ecalls, either [`sgxlkl_enclave_init`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/24467b08346cd7384eb93f845dec896a1d429711/src/enclave/enclave_oe.c#L395) (for the first ethread) or [`sgxlkl_ethread_init`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/24467b08346cd7384eb93f845dec896a1d429711/src/enclave/enclave_oe.c#L277) (for subsequent ethreads).
```

Each of these threads calls `lthread_run` to start an instance of the lthread scheduler.

The ethreads do not use the FS segment on x86-64.
The GS segment stores a pointer to the Open Enclave state and the lthread scheduler.

> The lthread context switch routine switches the FS segment register and makes this available for higher layers in the threading stack

Reviewer: a link to the context switch routine would be helpful here.

Author: ```suggestion
The [lthread context switch](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/796b346d4762a93be7bfc2ba5ce97b9ab840a4bd/src/sched/lthread.c#L466) [switches the FS segment register](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/796b346d4762a93be7bfc2ba5ce97b9ab840a4bd/src/sched/lthread.c#L411) and makes this available for higher layers in the threading stack.
```

> LThreads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## LThreads
```

> ========

Author: ```suggestion
--------
```

The lthread library provides a *cooperative* threading model.

> The code lives in the [src/sched](../src/sched) directory in the SGX-LKL repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code lives in the [src/sched](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/tree/oe_port/src/sched) directory in the SGX-LKL repository.
```

because there are absolute links elsewhere.

Author: There are only absolute links because GitHub doesn't let you link to markers in a file.  They'd all be relative links if they could be.  The rest of the docs also use relative links where possible.

> The main scheduler loop

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### The main scheduler loop
```

> The main scheduler loop
> -----------------------

Author: ```suggestion
### The main scheduler loop
```

The main loop for the scheduler is in the [`lthread_run`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L214) function.
The function [pulls the next thread from the run queue](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L234) and then [calls `_lthread_resume`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L242).

The [`_lthread_resume`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L453) function does most of the work for running a thread.

> This sets up the initial thread state if required and then calls [`_switch`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L482), a short assembly routine that saves all registers that are preserved across function calls and restores the same set of registers from a buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`_lthread_resume` sets up the initial thread state if required and then calls [`_switch`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L482), a short assembly routine that saves all registers that are preserved across function calls and restores the same set of registers from a buffer.
```

The `_switch` routine [restores the stack pointer](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L147) of the thread being switched to and pushes the new instruction pointer value onto the new stack.

> If this thread is a new thread, its instruction pointer was [set during thread initialisation](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L540).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the thread is a new thread, its instruction pointer was [set during thread initialisation](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L540).
```

> If this thread has previously yielded, the instruction pointer is the [return address for the `_switch` call that switched away from the lthread](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L134).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the thread has previously yielded, the instruction pointer is the [return address for the `_switch` call that switched away from the lthread](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L134).
```

Note that `_switch` does *not* switch between two arbitrary lthreads.
One of the threads involved in a `_switch` call is always the scheduler.
The `_switch` call in `_lthread_resume` switches to another thread, the call [in `_lthread_yield_cb`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L340) and [in `_lthread_yield`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L346) switch back to the scheduler.

> Locking

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Locking
```

> Locking
> -------

Author: ```suggestion
### Locking
```

There are two primitives for building locks in the lthreads implementation.

> Ticket locks are spinlocks, futexes provide a fast path using atomic operations but then sleep.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why?  The intro paragraph gives the overview of the contents of the sections.

> ### Ticked locks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Ticket locks
```

> Ticket locks are defined and documented in [src/include/enclave/ticketlock.h](src/include/enclave/ticketlock.h).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ticket locks are spinlocks.
They are defined and documented in [src/include/enclave/ticketlock.h](../src/include/enclave/ticketlock.h).
```

> Acquiring a ticket lock will spin in a compare and swap (CAS) loop.

Reviewer: This isn't quite what you meant.

I'm not sure of a short way to resay it.

Perhaps "Waiting to acquire"?

Author: ```suggestion
A thread acquiring a ticket lock will spin in a compare and swap (CAS) loop until it successfully acquires the lock.
```

If an lthread yields while holding a ticket lock, there is a chance of deadlock because the next thread to try to acquire the lock will spin in a CAS loop and not yield.

> This may, in turn, prevent the thread holding the lock from being able to run.

Reviewer: This perhaps requires more explanation.

Author: ```suggestion
This may, in turn, prevent the thread holding the lock from being able to run.
In the simplest case, consider a system running with a single ethread.
If a thread yields while holding a ticket lock, the next thread that attempts to acquire the same ticket lock will spin and not yield to the scheduler.
The first thread is never rescheduled and so cannot release the lock.
Similar situations can occur with multiple ethreads if more than one lthread attempts to acquire ticket locks held by yielded lthreads.
```

Ticket locks are used to implement some parts of the lthread scheduler.

> This means that there is no way for them to be made to yield in their spin loop.

Reviewer: I think the last 2 sentences are confusing. I'm not sure what you are trying to convey here.

Author: Better?

> Yielding transfers control from the current lthread to the scheduler and so the concept does not exist when the lthread is running.

Author: ```suggestion
Looking at the ticket lock code in isolation may lead you to believe that this limitation could be removed by adding a yield call in the the CAS loop.
This is not possible because yielding transfers control from the current lthread to the scheduler.
If the caller is the scheduler then there is no associated lthread that can yield.
```

> ### Lthread futexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Lthread futexes
```

The lthread futex implementation is a simplified version of the Linux `futex` system call.
A futex is a 32-bit word that can be used to hold state used to implement arbitrary locking primitives.

> On the fast path, all updates to the futex word are done by CPU atomic operations.

Reviewer: I find the next 3 sentences confusing. I'm not sure what the value they are bringing is. They don't really seem to provide any additional details that are important  to the following 3 paragraphs which seem to be the really important information in this context.

Author: I can't tell which three sentences these are referring to.  GitHub lets you select multiple lines for a comment - that makes it easier to see what the comment refers to.

For example, a mutex could be implemented by treating a value of 0 as unlocked and a value of 1 as locked, with a CAS changing the state from 0 to 1 to acquire the lock on the fast path.
The futex calls handle the slow path, where one or more threads need to wait.

> The `enclave_futex_wait` call suspends the thread until a corresponding `enclave_futex_wake` call on the same key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `enclave_futex_wait` call suspends a given thread until a corresponding `enclave_futex_wake` call for that thread.
```

There's been no mention of "key" so while correct, I think it would lead to questions.

Author: ```suggestion
The `enclave_futex_wait` call suspends the calling thread until another thread makes a corresponding `enclave_futex_wake` call for the same futex word address, or until a timeout specified by the caller is reached.
```

> The futex system is responsible for ensuring that wake-up events are not lost and so acquires a global lock and then checks that the expected value is still present at the memory location.

Reviewer: If someone doesn't know how futexes work, I think this is going to be really confusing.

I'm not sure how it needs to be reworked.

This lock ensures that a `enclave_futex_wake` call either happens after the `enclave_futex_wait` has sent the calling thread to sleep or happens before and prevents the thread from sleeping.

> The sleeping threads are stored in a linked list, threaded through the thread pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The threads suspended by `enclave_futex_wait` are stored in a linked list, threaded through the thread pointers.
```

I don't know what "threaded through the thread pointers" means here.

> A `enclave_futex_wait` call can return (waking up the sleeping thread) as a result of one of two things.

Reviewer: The rest of this is confusing. But only because of a lack of info.

So far we have discussed wait purely as a thing which requires a corresponding wake.

I think it would be better to pivot here and say something like "in addition, to watching wait/wake futex call pairs, enclave_futex_wait` can also be called using a timeout. The given thread will be suspended until it is woken up after it's timeout has passed".

Threads suspended via enclave_futex_wait with a timeout are awoken by `futext_tick`.
The lthread scheduler calls `futex_tick` in between scheduling threads.

Author: I think this was addressed by the change one paragraph up.

Either a `enclave_futex_wake` acquires the lock, finds a waiting thread, and schedules it, or the `futex_tick` call triggers the timeout.

The lthread scheduler calls `futex_tick` in between scheduling threads to wake up any sleeping threads that have timed out.
This tries to acquire the ticket lock but returns immediately if it fails.
This can happen only if a thread is currently doing a futex call or if another thread is handling the tick.

> ### LKL host interface synchronisation primitives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### LKL host interface synchronisation primitives
```

> The futex code is used in [src/lkl/posix-host.c](../src/lkl/posix-host.c) to implement two synchronisation primitives for use by LKL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The aforementioned enclave futex code is used in [src/lkl/posix-host.c](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/oe_port/src/lkl/posix-host.c) to implement two synchronisation primitives for use by LKL.
```

to match the absolutes used most other places in the document. Changing to relative for those and keeping this relative would work as well.

Author: See above: I wish GitHub had support for the in-document anchors in comments that the Listings package for LaTeX provides.

These are not currently used anywhere else, though that may change in the future.

> #### `lkl_mutex`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### `lkl_mutex`
```

If the lock is held but no other threads are waiting, this thread does an atomic exchange to move the futex word to the locked-with-waiters state.
The result of the exchange contains the previous state of the mutex.
If the exchange moved from the unlocked state, the lock routine tries again to acquire the lock.
If the exchange moved from one of the locked states, the lock routine waits on the futex word with the expected state of locked-with-waiters.
When the futex call returns, it retries the atomic exchange.

On the unlock path, recursive mutexes simply decrement their recursion count until they are in the same state as a non-recursive mutex.
The final unlock then does an atomic fetch-and-decrement on the futex word.
This gives the old state.
If this decrement transitioned from the locked-with-no-waiters state, there is nothing more to do.
If the decrement instead transitioned from the locked-with-waiters state, the unlock routine transitions explicitly to the unlocked state and then calls `enclave_futex_wake` to wake up all waiters.

> #### `lkl_sem`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### `lkl_sem`
```

The `lkl_sem` is a trivial counting semaphore.
This is analogous to a bucket of semaphore flags controlling access to a resource such that you can proceed when you have a flag and must wait if there are no flags available.
The `sem_down` function acquires a flag, blocking if one is not available.
The `sem_up` function returns a flag (which may or may not have been previously acquired) and wakes up any waiting flags.

These use the futex word to hold the semaphore value.
The down operation reads the count and, if the count is not zero, does a CAS to try to decrement it.
If the CAS fails or the initial value was zero, it then calls `enclave_futex_wait` with an expected value of 0 to wait until the value is non-zero.
When `enclave_futex_wait` returns, this process repeats.

The up operation is simpler.
It does an atomic fetch-and-increment operation.
If the transition is from zero to one then there may be waiters so it then calls `enclave_futex_wake` to wake them up.

This implementation is not very efficient and could be improved.

> Linux tasks
> ===========

Author: ```suggestion
Linux tasks
-----------
```

The task associated with an lthread is stored using the `lthread_setspecific` function, analogous to `pthread_setspecific`.
When an lthread enters the kernel, the syscall handler first acquires the CPU lock.
It then looks up the task associated with this thread, lazily allocating one if required.
At this point, the kernel scheduler and the lthread scheduler may have different views of which thread is running.
LKL's [`switch_to_host_task`](https://github.com/lsds/lkl/blob/385f721b339fe48b188b4924c2663e1ea2cdeb13/arch/lkl/kernel/threads.c#L199) routine is responsible for synchronising these states.
This first marks the desired task as runnable and then runs the scheduler until it gets to that task.
This time, `__switch_to` routine does a [long jump](https://github.com/lsds/lkl/blob/385f721b339fe48b188b4924c2663e1ea2cdeb13/arch/lkl/kernel/threads.c#L170) back out of the scheduler, leaving the expected thread as the currently running one.

When a thread leaves a system call handler, its task is left in the `TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE` state.
This prevents the Linux scheduler from attempting to reschedule it.
It can then run, outside of the kernel, for as long as possible.

> Pthreads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pthreads
```

> Pthreads
> ========

Author: ```suggestion
Pthreads
--------
```

The SGX-LKL threading implementation
====================================

SGX-LKL has four kinds of threads: ethreads, lthreads, Linux tasks, and pthreads.
This document explains how they are implemented and how they relate.

> Ethreads are the lowest-level threads.

Author: ```suggestion
Ethreads (enclave threads) are the lowest-level threads.
```

These are roughly analogous to VCPUs in conventional VMs.
In SGX, each ethread corresponds to a thread-control structure (TCS), allocated by [Open Enclave](https://openenclave.io/sdk/).

The lthreads layer provides a cooperative threading library on top of ethreads.
Each ethread runs an instance of the lthread scheduler, which pulls lthreads from a multi-producer, multi-consumer queue (MPMCQ) to run.
These threads run until they explicitly yield.

The Linux kernel (LKL) manages its own task abstraction.

> Each Linux task is associated with an lthread.

Author: ```suggestion
LKL, unlike other Linux architectures, expects the host environment to provide a threading abstraction.
LKL associates each Linux task with a thread provided by its host environment ('host thread').
In the case of SGX-LKL, lthreads provide LKL's host thread implementation and so each Linux task is backed by an lthread.
```

If the thread is a new thread, its instruction pointer was [set during thread initialisation](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L540).
If the thread has previously yielded, the instruction pointer is the [return address for the `_switch` call that switched away from the lthread](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L134).

Note that `_switch` does *not* switch between two arbitrary lthreads.
One of the threads involved in a `_switch` call is always the scheduler.
The `_switch` call in `_lthread_resume` switches to another thread, the call [in `_lthread_yield_cb`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L340) and [in `_lthread_yield`](https://github.com/lsds/sgx-lkl/blob/47a5f0e718badfa85694a9de6222af41d9bfbb84/src/sched/lthread.c#L346) switch back to the scheduler.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After the execution is switched back to the scheduler, `lthread_run` checks for virtio wake up events and might add a sleeping lthread to the run queue. 

`lthread_run` maintains a contiguous idle loop count. In each loop, if no lthread is dequeued from the run queue and no sleeping thread is enqueued to the run queue,
the loop is considered as an idle loop. Any non-idle loop resets the contiguous idle loop count. Once the contiguous idle loop count reaches a set threshold,
`lthread_run` invokes an OE OCALL to put the ethread on sleep for a set period. The host is expected to resume the ethread after the sleep period passes.

`lthread_run` breaks out of the loop only when the enclave is terminating.
```

Author: Reformatting (one sentence per line, so future diffs are not so painful) and correcting slightly:

```suggestion
After the running lthread yeidds, `lthread_run` checks whether any sleeping threads (those blocked waiting for event channels or futexes) are runnable and, if so, adds them to the queue.

`lthread_run` maintains a count of consecutive loop iterations in which there were not runnable lthreads.
Once this reaches a threshold, the scheduler issues an ocall that suspends execution of the ethread until either an event channel is signaled or a timeout expires.

`lthread_run` exits the loop and returns only when the enclave is terminating.
```

The futex calls handle the slow path, where one or more threads need to wait.

The `enclave_futex_wait` call suspends the calling thread until another thread makes a corresponding `enclave_futex_wake` call for the same futex word address, or until a timeout specified by the caller is reached.
The futex system is responsible for ensuring that wake-up events are not lost and so acquires a global lock and then checks that the expected value is still present at the memory location.
This lock ensures that a `enclave_futex_wake` call either happens after the `enclave_futex_wait` has sent the calling thread to sleep or happens before and prevents the thread from sleeping.

The threads suspended by `enclave_futex_wait` are stored in a linked list, threaded through the thread pointers.
A `enclave_futex_wait` call can return (waking up the sleeping thread) as a result of one of two things.
Either a `enclave_futex_wake` acquires the lock, finds a waiting thread, and schedules it, or the `futex_tick` call triggers the timeout.

> The lthread scheduler calls `futex_tick` in between scheduling threads to wake up any sleeping threads that have timed out.

Reviewer 3: How does the `spin` in the scheduler code work?

Author: Do you mean `a_spin`?  If so, it's just an x86 `pause` instruction (a hint to superscalar CPUs that they want monitor for cache coherency traffic rather than filling up their load/store pipeline with speculative loads at the same address).

Reviewer 3: No, I meant the `spins` variable. It counts down in the while loop and also gets reset to 0 before the OCALL. The logic beyond the code is not clear to me.
